---
permalink: /
title: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I am a physical oceanographer and climate scientist interested in
ocean physics and modelling. My research focuses on how processes
acting on small-scales, such as turbulent mixing and mesoscale eddies,
influence the large-scale ocean circulation and its variability. I use
theoretical techniques combined with a range of idealized and
realistic ocean models (e.g. the regional model ROMS, the global model
MOM5 and the spectral model Dedalus) and analysis of oceanographic
data to better understand interactions across scales in the ocean. I
obtained my PhD in 2016 from [Stanford
University](https://www.stanford.edu/), working with Professor Leif
Thomas. I am currently a postdoctoral researcher in the [Centre of
Excellence for Climate Extremes](http://climateextremes.org.au/), the
[Climate Change Research Centre](http://www.ccrc.unsw.edu.au/) and the
[School of Mathematics and
Statistics](https://www.maths.unsw.edu.au/about/applied-mathematics)
at the [University of New South Wales](https://www.unsw.edu.au/) in
Sydney, Australia.

## Research Interests

My research interests include:

* _Equatorial dynamics, turbulent mixing and Tropical Instability
Waves:_ I am interested in equatorial dynamics and in particular how
processes on short timescales (months to seconds), such as tropical
instability waves (TIWs), internal gravity waves and small-scale
turbulence, influence the large-scale tropical circulation and its
modes of variability such as the El-Nino Southern Oscillation
(ENSO). My PhD work focused on TIWs and their role in driving mixing
in the equatorial Pacific (e.g. their modulation of shear-driven
turbulence, [Holmes and Thomas 2015
J. Phys. Oceanogr.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-14-0209.1)). More
recently I have shown that the chaotic nature of TIWs influences ENSO
predictability ([Holmes et al. 2019 Climate
Dynamics](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-018-4217-0)). I have also
been collaborating with scientists at the National Centre for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR, USA) to study variability of turbulent
mixing at the Equator from observations and a hierarchy of
high-resolution models.

* _Ocean Heat Transport in Temperature Space_ The ocean is warmed by
air-sea heat fluxes at low-latitudes and warm temperatures and cooled
in the mid- and high-latitudes at colder temperatures. Therefore, in
order to maintain a steady state, heat must be moved not only from low
to high latitudes (the ocean's *meridional* heat transport), but also
from warm to cold temperatures (the ocean's *diathermal* heat
transport). By developing a suite of novel heat transport diagnostics
within a series of MOM5-based global ocean models (e.g. the Australian
community ocean model,
[ACCESS-OM2](http://cosima.org.au/index.php/models/access-om2/)), I
study how this ocean heat transport depends on parameterized diffusive
mixing processes that drive diathermal heat transport ([Holmes et
al. 2018 J. Phys. Oceanogr.](https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-18-0098.1),
[2019 Geophysical Research
Letters](https://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2019GL085160). This diagnostic
framework allows these important processes to be isolated and
quantified, including the `artificial numerical mixing arising from
the discretization of tracer transport in ocean models.

* _Abyssal Mixing and the Abyssal Diapycnal Circulation:_ I am
interested in diapycnal mixing and how it influences abyssal ocean
circulation and the transformation of Antarctic Bottom Water into
lighter water masses. As mixing in the abyssal ocean is
seafloor-intensified, the topography of the seafloor has a strong
influence on abyssal circulation pathways and water-mass
transformation ([de Lavergne et al. 2017
Nature](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature24472) and [Holmes et al. 2018
J. Phys. Oceanogr.](https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-17-0141.1)). More
recent work using theoretical techniques and idealized process
modelling has focused on how tracers are transported in the abyssal
ocean in order to inform a planned field tracer release experiment
([Holmes et al. 2019
J. Phys. Oceanogr.](https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-19-0006.1)).

* _Antarctic coastal circulation and subsurface warming:_ I am
involved in a series of projects that aim to understand the mechanisms
through which warm Circumpolar Deep Water penetrates onto the
Antarctic continental shelf, potentially increasing the melt rate of
vulnerable ice shelves with worrying implications for global sea level
rise. One such mechanism highlighted by our work involves the
transport of heat onto the continental shelf driven by bottom Ekman
transport arising from coastally trapped barotropic waves that
propagate around the Antarctic coastline [Spence, Holmes et al. 2017
Nature Climate Change](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3335).

This website contains my CV, a list of publications, conference talks
and a short summary of some of the projects that I am currently
involved in.  If you wish to know more or have any other questions,
please contact me at
[ryan.holmes@unsw.edu.au](mailto:ryan.holmes@unsw.edu.au)

